Hello and welcome back to the course on Tableau.
In the previous editorial we looked at action filters in dashboards.
And today we will look at how we can apply highlighting to dashboards.
And also we will discuss why highlighting is actually different to filtering.
So let's get straight to it.
Here we've got the dashboard that we're using lost time and still we've got the filter on the action
filter is still applied.
So when we click on different states as you can see the scatter plot is adjusting automatically to to
just show the customers that reside in that specific state.
So now what we will do is we will go to dashboard actions and we will remove this action that we created.
So we just click remove.
OK.
And now if we select the different states nothing happens to this catapult.
No the goal today is we want is sort of filtering this scatter plot.
We actually want to see the customers highlighted.
So we want all of the dots to remain but only the relevant dots to stand out so that we know how they
compare to the rest of the customers on this caterpillar.
And so the first thing that you might want to do is you go to dashboard actions and you go to add action
and you click highlight and here naturally you select map of Europe select and the target sheets are
customers kind of world map of Europe and pretty much the same thing as we did with our filtering.
You click OK you click OK and then you click on a state and nothing happens and you go for another state
nothing happened and so on.
So how come did filtering work but highlighting doesn't work.
What is the difference.
And this is an important point which a lot of people kind of don't will disregard.
Basically they don't see the difference and therefore sometimes can fall into this trap assuming that
highlighting works just as filtering but it doesn't filter the worksheet it actually just highlights
the values.
In reality it's not as simple as that.
There is one main difference between the two and that is that filtering actually filters your data set
and therefore allows you to reconstruct the scatter plot.
So when I have filtering on and I select this state what happens in the background is tableau selects
all the rows of the data that are relevant to this state in France which is Il de France.
And it only leaves them and then it removes all the rest of the rows in our data set that have nothing
to do feel de France.
And so then the caterpillar is only working with the IL defraud star rose and it is able to create a
scatter plot based on that information.
Now what happens with highlighting is that the data set is actually not filtered so that process is
not running in the background you're not deleting any or temporary deleting any rows from the dataset
which you're asking dashboard to do is plot everything.
And at the same time highlight the customers that are relevant or related to IL de France.
And that is where the problem occurs and why is that.
Well that is because some of our customers in our dataset are actually from many different regions.
So there are customers that are ordering products both in France and in the U.K. and so on.
So one customer in this particular dataset is not attached to one particular state or even country.
If you look through the data you will find cases when customers are in different states countries and
even cities states and even countries.
So let's have a look at that quickly so here's our data set.
Let's quickly add a filter so data filter and order the data by the customer name.
So here you can see that right away.
Aaron for instance has ordered from Italy from the U.K. from Germany from Netherlands from France.
And then let's say Adam here has ordered from Italy U.K. France and so on.
So there are multiple customers that have ordered from multiple different regions.
And that is what is confusing our highlighting.
So when we ask the dashboard to highlight everybody who has ordered from France it cannot just highlight
for instance if we go look at Aaron should should tableau highlight Aaron or should tableau not highlight
Aaron.
He has ordered from France.
But in that case if tableau does highlight Aaron in this in the scatter plot what will happen is that
we will see his total profits.
So here you can see that we've got profits listed sales and the profit margin.
This is Max literally.
But for Aaron it'll be the same thing.
What will happen is we will see the profit the sales and the profit margin for his all of his orders
that he did from all the regions.
And that is because once again our data is not going to be filtered.
So the rose not relevant to IL de France I'm not going to be removed from the data.
There's still going to be in this caterpillar and that is confusing tableau.
So how can we highlight Aaron with his two French orders or maybe.
Yeah there's two.
So this is Aaron and he's made two orders from France.
But at the same time he has had a lot of orders from other places.
So if we highlight him then we will be giving the user the wrong information we will be telling him
that Aaron's made this many orders altogether.
But in reality only two of them are from France.
So that and that's why tableau chooses not to highlight Aaron at all in order not to mislead the user.
So what we can do in this case is we can actually change the granularity or scatter plot in order to
include the state.
And that way tableau will be able to easily operate at that level.
So let's go to the customer scatter plot.
You can simply go to the worksheet here or you can click this button over here which is go to worksheet
or you can click this button over here which also says go to a worksheet.
So once we're at the worksheet for the customer scatter plot what we're going to do is we're going to
change the granularity of the data right now if you look at the bottom there's six hundred and 617 marks.
Now what we're going to add is the state.
So we'll just drag state into detail and right away you can see there's more marks in fact if we go
down here now there is one thousand and sixty seven marks and that is because customers can be duplicated
here if they are present in multiple states.
So now where we go back to the dashboard we can see that once again there's more data here but also
when we click.
You can see that tableau is easily highlighting the right data points here because it knows that it
needs to highlight all of the customers that purchased from this region or that made their orders from
this region.
And if they are customers that had orders from multiple regions it will only take those data points
are relevant for those customers for these regions.
And so now Tableau is doing a great job in highlighting.
If we go to dashboard and we go to actions highlight and we click edit you will see here that you can
actually select the target highlighting and you can select a different field.
So in this case we want to know what what is happening is Tableau is highlighting by state.
So if we click OK that will basically be the same result as what we saw just now.
Probably one more thing is that you can adjust this highlighting so you can specify the rules here so
you can say don't Hello by state by highlight by country.
And that way wherever you click in the country it will be highlighting the same customers that once
again is misleading because you're kind of the user is thinking that is highlighting the tables highlighting
the specific state although the states are all highlighted on this part of the map.
But I would probably stay away from that.
Just you do have that level of control in my case.
I'm just gonna keep it all fields.
So there you go.
That's how highlighting works and that's how it is different to actions.
I mean two filters in tableau.
Action filters and tableau.
So be careful of that action filters just to recap action filters work at the data level they filter
out the data and then that data is supplied to the rest of the worksheets in your talent in your tableau
dashboard whereas filters are highlighting they don't.
Highlighting does not take rose out of the data and therefore it is still working the whole dataset.
And so you have to be careful of the level of granularity of your different worksheets in your dashboard.
So there you go.
That is how highlighting works in tableau.
I look forward to see you next time.
And until then happy analyzing.